zamjene sol (#3193)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/coci-16-zamjene.mdx

---
id: coci-16-zamjene
source: COCI 2016
title: Zamjene
author: Kevin Sheng
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](https://github.com/mostafa-saad/MyCompetitiveProgramming/blob/master/Olympiad/COCI/official/2017/contest2_solutions)

## Explanation

If you've done [Wormhole Sort](http://usaco.org/index.php?page=viewproblem2&cpid=992),
this problem should look a bit familiar.

> From that problem's editorial, we know that it's possible to sort a component

Reviewer: this way of mentioning the editorial is iffy, but it's alright. if you can, summarize a little bit.

> iff each positions' *sorted position* is in the same component as itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if each positions' *sorted position* is in the same component as itself.
```
iff 🥺

Author: if & only if?

Reviewer: oops meant to format the change like this:
```suggestion
only if each positions' *sorted position* is in the same component as itself.
```

Reviewer: up to u though, iff looks fine upon second inspection

The main issue is addressing type 3 and type 4 queries.
We need to be able to efficiently check if a component can be sorted, and if it can't,
we also need to see how many components it can be paired up with so that they can be sorted as a whole.

To do this, we have to check if a component has all the needed numbers for it to be able to be rearranged into sorted order.

For example, say this was our (0-indexed) array:
$$
[16, 2, 10, 7, 12, 5, 3, 7, 20, 11]
$$

A component that consisted of the indexes $0$, $3$, and $4$ would need the numbers $2$, $7$, and $7$ to be sortable.

We can get all the needed numbers by sorting the given array and getting the numbers at the positions of the components, but how can we quickly check if the two sets of numbers are the same? The answer is hashing.

If we assign each number a certain power of a prime $P$ ($42$ gets a power of $30$, $50$ gets a power of $35$, etc.),
we can obtain our hash by multiplying each power by the number of times it occurs in the set.

For example, if our component was the multiset ${3, 3, 4, 4, 5}$, and each number's power was itself, our hash would be:
$$
2 \cdot P^3 + 2 \cdot P^4 + 1 \cdot P^5
$$

<Info>

> It's also possible to assign each distinct number in the array a random value from a large range like $[1,10^6]$.

Reviewer 2: what I actually meant was that if you replace every element of `elem_pow` with a random 64-bit integer the solution should still work.

Reviewer 2: would be good to think about what the collision probability is if you do this

Author: > what I actually meant was that if you replace every element of `elem_pow` with a random 64-bit integer the solution should still work.

that's what i meant by this?

Reviewer 2: "from a large range like $[1,10^6]$" is not the same as "a random 64-bit integer"

We need some way to match up components such that the sum of their required hashes equals the sum of their actual hashes.
In other words, if we let $x$ be the actual hash and $y$ be the required hash, we need to find all pairs of components ($i$ and $j$) such that the following is satisfied:
$$
x_i+x_j=y_i+y_j
$$

If we put the $i$s on one side, and $j$s on another, we get this:
$$
x_i-y_i=y_j-x_j
$$

This motivates us keeping a map of the difference between the required hash and actual hash and the number of positions whose components have such a difference.
It doesn't matter whether we subtract the required hash from the actual hash or vice versa, as long as we stay consistent.
We also keep track of the number of pairs of bad components that can be matched up.

When adding or removing a bad component, we get its difference $d$ and see how many positions whose components have the difference $-d$ through the map to update the number of pairs.

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(Q \cdot \alpha(N))$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <map>
#include <algorithm>

using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::vector;

> class DominikArray {

Reviewer: codesnip pls

Author: this class is the meat of the entire program

Reviewer: oops im dumb ;w;

### Hashing

The main issue is addressing type 3 and type 4 queries.
We need to be able to efficiently check if a component can be sorted, and if it can't,
we also need to see how many components it can be paired up with so that they can be sorted as a whole.

To do this, we have to check if a component has all the needed numbers for it to be able to be rearranged into sorted order.

For example, say this was our (0-indexed) array:
$$
[16, 2, 10, 7, 12, 5, 3, 7, 20, 11]
$$

A component that consisted of the indexes $0$, $3$, and $4$ would need the numbers $2$, $7$, and $7$ to be sortable.

We can get all the needed numbers by sorting the given array and getting the numbers at the positions of the components, but how can we quickly check if the two sets of numbers are the same? The answer is hashing.

If we assign each number a certain random number,
we can obtain our hash by multiplying each random number by the number of times it occurs in the set.

For example, if our component was the multiset ${3, 3, 4, 4, 5}$, and $R_i$ would be the random number of $i$, our hash would be:
$$
2 \cdot R_3 + 2 \cdot R_4 + 1 \cdot R_5
$$

<Info>

> It's also possible to assign each distinct number in the array a distinct power of a prime $P$.

Reviewer 2: either remove this or add a note that doing so does not guarantee the same failure probability

</Info>

Each component should not only have a hash of its number, but also a hash of the numbers it's supposed to have.

> For example, if our component was just the number $3$ but needs a $4$ to be sorted, its hash and required hash would be $P^3$ and $P^4$ respectively.

Reviewer 2: ^ this should be updated?

> For example, if our component was just the number $3$ but needs a $4$ to be sorted, its hash and required hash would be $P^3$ and $P^4$ respectively.

Reviewer 2: ^ this should be updated

To answer a type 3 query, we check if there's any bad components.
If there are, we output `NE`, and otherwise, we output `DA`.

However, answering type 4 queries are a bit more tricky.
We need some way to match up components such that the sum of their required hashes equals the sum of their actual hashes.
In other words, if we let $x$ be the actual hash and $y$ be the required hash, we need to find all pairs of components ($i$ and $j$) such that the following is satisfied:
$$
x_i+x_j=y_i+y_j
$$

If we put the $i$s on one side, and $j$s on another, we get this:
$$
x_i-y_i=y_j-x_j
$$

This motivates us keeping a map of the difference between the required hash and actual hash and the number of positions whose components have such a difference.
It doesn't matter whether we subtract the required hash from the actual hash or vice versa, as long as we stay consistent.
We also keep track of the number of pairs of bad components that can be matched up.

When adding or removing a bad component, we get its difference $d$ and see how many positions whose components have the difference $-d$ through the map to update the number of pairs.

## Implementation

> **Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(Q \cdot \alpha(N))$

Reviewer 2: also add the probability of failure below this (and optionally, a short explanation about it)

			}
		}

		void swap(int a, int b) {
			int top_a = get_top(a);
			int top_b = get_top(b);

			// temporarily take them out of the bad log (if applicable)
			remove_if_bad(top_a);
			remove_if_bad(top_b);

			// change the hashes of the two components
			hash[top_a] = hash[top_a] + elem_val[arr[b]] - elem_val[arr[a]];
			hash[top_b] = hash[top_b] + elem_val[arr[a]] - elem_val[arr[b]];

			// add the back (if applicable)
			add_if_bad(top_a);
			add_if_bad(top_b);

			std::swap(arr[a], arr[b]);
		}

		void link(int a, int b) {
			a = get_top(a);
			b = get_top(b);
			if (a == b) {
				return;
			}

			if (size[a] < size[b]) {
				return link(b, a);
			}
			
			remove_if_bad(a);
			remove_if_bad(b);
			
			// standard dsu operations
			size[a] += size[b];
			parent[b] = a;
			
			// add the hash of the smaller component to the bigger one
			hash[a] = hash[a] + hash[b];
			req_hash[a] = req_hash[a] + req_hash[b];

			// since b's merged into a, we just add a back (if applicable)
			add_if_bad(a);
		}

		bool sortable() {
			// for everything to be sortable, there can't be any bad components
			return bad_num == 0;
		}

		ll needed_pair_num() {
			return cloud_pairs;
		}
};

> // https://oj.uz/problem/view/COCI16_zamjene (input omitted due to length)

Reviewer 2: it looks like you undid some of your last few commits

### Hashing

The main issue is addressing type 3 and type 4 queries.
We need to be able to efficiently check if a component can be sorted, and if it can't,
we also need to see how many components it can be paired up with so that they can be sorted as a whole.

To do this, we have to check if a component has all the needed numbers for it to be able to be rearranged into sorted order.

For example, say this was our (0-indexed) array:
$$
[16, 2, 10, 7, 12, 5, 3, 7, 20, 11]
$$

A component that consisted of the indexes $0$, $3$, and $4$ would need the numbers $2$, $7$, and $7$ to be sortable.

We can get all the needed numbers by sorting the given array and getting the numbers at the positions of the components, but how can we quickly check if the two sets of numbers are the same? The answer is hashing.

If we assign each number a certain random number,
we can obtain our hash by multiplying each random number by the number of times it occurs in the set.

For example, if our component was the multiset ${3, 3, 4, 4, 5}$, and $R_i$ would be the random number of $i$, our hash would be:
$$
2 \cdot R_3 + 2 \cdot R_4 + 1 \cdot R_5
$$

<Info>

> It's also possible to assign each distinct number in the array a distinct power of a prime $P$.

Reviewer 2: actually I"m confused by this, why would you choose P to be prime (as opposed to some random integer in $[0,MOD)$)

Author: isn't that what you do w/ strings?

Reviewer 2: no it isn't

Author: <img width="920" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/55369003/203621642-f17491be-7c64-4a24-bada-642924328722.png">
what's this

Reviewer 2: I think that's just wrong, there is no particular reason to make $p$ prime.

Author: my whole life is a lie
